<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>IX: The King of England</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-1" id="chapter-1-9" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</h3>
				<p epub:type="title">The King of England</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Gorgeous in a pale-blue velvet suit with crimson facings and ribands, and much rich lace, the Most Noble the Marquis of Roxhythe entered the doors of Whitehall. He carried his gloves and his cane in one hand and in the other he held his comfit box. The page at the door cast one glance at the handsome face beneath the wide brimmed hat with its drooping feather, and straightened in every line of his body.</p>
			<p>Roxhythe’s slumbrous eyes travelled over him.</p>
			<p>“His Majesty?” he said.</p>
			<p>The page bowed.</p>
			<p>“I think His Majesty is in his closet, sir. Shall I send Master Hutchins to announce you?”</p>
			<p>“Do,” said Roxhythe.</p>
			<p>An elegant gentleman crossed the hall towards him.</p>
			<p>“I protest ’tis a joy to see you again, Roxhythe,” he simpered. “You had a fair crossing?”</p>
			<p>“I believe I did,” assented my lord. “How doth her ladyship?”</p>
			<p>“Very well, very well,” said the elegant gentleman. “His Majesty is all a-fret to see you. He will be delighted. He had not expected you so soon.”</p>
			<p>On his way up the Grand Staircase, Roxhythe met some half a dozen gentlemen, who were all duly enthusiastic over his return. He reflected that his was something of a triumphal entry.</p>
			<p>As he neared the King’s closet he spoke to the page beside him.</p>
			<p>“Is His Majesty disengaged?”</p>
			<p>“I think Lord Lauderdale is with him, my lord.”</p>
			<p>“In that case you may announce me,” said Roxhythe.</p>
			<p>“Yes, my lord. His Majesty gave orders that you were to be taken to him at once.” He knocked on the door of the closet.</p>
			<p>Charles’ voice bade him enter. It held a peevish note.</p>
			<p>The page opened wide the door.</p>
			<p>“The Most Noble the Marquis of Roxhythe!”</p>
			<p>Hat in hand Roxhythe walked into the room.</p>
			<p>Charles was seated at the table, opposite Lord Lauderdale, but at the favourite’s entrance, he pushed back his chair and rose quickly to his feet.</p>
			<p>“David! Already!” He embraced Roxhythe before my lord had time to make his bow. He held him by the shoulders, scanning his face.</p>
			<p>“Zoons, Davy! how I have waited for this moment!”</p>
			<p>“Not so impatiently as have I, Sir.” Roxhythe smiled back into his eyes.</p>
			<p>My Lord Lauderdale rose, a red spot on either cheek.</p>
			<p>“I take it Your Majesty has no further use for me,” he grated.</p>
			<p>“None whatsoever, my lord,” answered Charles gaily. “Some other time.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>Lauderdale jerked a bow to him, and another to Roxhythe. He went angrily out of the room.</p>
			<p>“A good riddance to his dourness,” said Charles. “Davy, Davy, I have missed you so sorely I swear I’ll never send you from me again!”</p>
			<p>“I am glad you have missed me, Sir,” said Roxhythe. “So you may have some conception of my poor feelings. These weeks have seemed months!”</p>
			<p>Charles drew him to a couch.</p>
			<p>“I vow you have had the best of it, David. I have been harassed and over-run with petitions, and what not, and empty-headed dolts beside. You would not believe the number that have tried to take your place! But there is only one Roxhythe. How have you fared?”</p>
			<p>Roxhythe grew solemn.</p>
			<p>“Very badly, Sir.”</p>
			<p>“What’s that? You have been in trouble?⁠—danger?”</p>
			<p>“Not I, Sir. ’Twas my errand that I spoke of.”</p>
			<p>Charles showed surprise.</p>
			<p>“Did you fail, David?”</p>
			<p>“Ay, Sir. There was no hope for success.”</p>
			<p>The King laughed a little ruefully.</p>
			<p>“Well, well! And so you failed! Has such a thing ever before come to pass?”</p>
			<p>“Seldom,” said his lordship. “But this time I was very grievously beaten.”</p>
			<p>The King settled himself against the cushions.</p>
			<p>“If ’twere not so damned annoying, ’twould be most diverting,” he said. “Tell me, David.”</p>
			<p>Roxhythe proceeded to relate his adventures up to the point of Roderick’s appearance on the scene.</p>
			<p>“I would Your Majesty could have seen that man!” he sighed. “He gave himself the airs of a duke, and he paraded his Puritan views for my edification. I do assure you, Sir; that I have never been so set at naught in my life. He spoke of the Prince as though he were Master of the Universe, and his whole manner was as formal as your father his courtiers never were. He came the second day with the news that the Prince would grant me an audience, as though ’twere some giant favour he were bestowing. I went to the Palace at eight in the evening⁠—I should tell you, Sir, that I was requested to be punctual⁠—and taken to Dart’s room. He led me out by another door, along countless gloomy vaults, each darker than the last, until we came to a hall. Then we met one of the Prince’s not so faithful gentlemen and I became a lackey, and was severely reprimanded. We shook off the man, and proceeded to the Prince’s apartments. Outside one of the doors was yet another man. He, though, was one of the Prince’s faithful ones. He sped us on our way. Dart ushered me into the room with all solemnity. Then he took my pistol from me. I suppose he thought I might assassinate His Highness in a fit of depression. At all events he took it, and left me to kick my heels, awaiting the Prince. And all as though I were in very sooth a lackey! I, Roxhythe, the King’s envoy!</p>
			<p>“Then came William of Orange⁠ ⁠…” he paused.</p>
			<p>Charles, who had been shaken with suppressed laughter, sat up.</p>
			<p>“I’ faith, Davy, I’d give much to have been with you! So you were pushed from pillar to post, my poor Marquis? Oh, lud!” Again he shook. “But what of my nephew?”</p>
			<p>Roxhythe spoke gravely.</p>
			<p>“Sir, he is a remarkable youth. In appearance he is slight, with a hook nose, and eyes that see everything at a glance. His manner is cold, brusque, repressed. His personality is overwhelming.”</p>
			<p>“So?” said Charles, interested. “As great as mine?”</p>
			<p>“In its way, Sir, greater. He has none of Your Majesty’s charm, but he forces himself into one’s memory. He attracts, and he repels. In spite of his youth, and his lack of polish, he holds the stage.”</p>
			<p>“Why, Roxhythe, this is marvellous! Proceed!”</p>
			<p>“He received me with as much ceremony as I had by that time learnt to expect. He had the air of an Emperor giving audience to one poor subject. He read Ashley’s packet. Then he asked me what Your Majesty hoped to gain by the bargain.”</p>
			<p>Charles burst out laughing again.</p>
			<p>“That I should have missed all this!”</p>
			<p>“I do confess, Sir, I was taken aback. In a very short time he showed me that if he was young in years, he was old in wisdom. He perceived that Ashley was little more than a catspaw; he sneered at the idea of your helping him to his rightful place. In fact, Sir, he desires to know why you have not come to his aid before now.”</p>
			<p>“The impudent young cockerel!”</p>
			<p>“You would not think so did you but see and hear him, Sir. He asked me what was to be the price of all you offered. I told him⁠—glibly enough, and evasively. He caught me up, and told me all too rightly what I meant. He saw through and through that proposition, Sir, and at last I was frank with him. I explained Your Majesty’s attitude⁠—with reservations. Then the storm burst. Odds body, Sir, but when the Prince loses his temper, one shivers in one’s shoes. He hailed words about me. He cried that Your Majesty was asking him to barter his Country and his honour for his own advancement. He bade me tell you that he was not a Stuart. He said he saw very clearly how you were seeking to trick him into an alliance by which only you would profit. Finally he tore the packet into shreds and bade me tell you that that was his answer. Then he fell to coughing, and I tried to collect my wits. Sir, I argued with that boy until my throat was parched, and always he had a ready answer wherewith to dumbfound me. He gave away naught without meaning to, and I could not gather what were his intentions. But he has evidently received advances from King Louis, and I think he hopes to frighten you by holding that over your head. That he will ally himself with any foreign power to gain the Stadtholdership, I do not think for a moment. He is as honest as the day, and as astute as old Nick himself. He thinks to rise without foreign aid, but he told me he would not seek to overthrow a Government that he fully acknowledged. He is to be feared, Sir.”</p>
			<p>“My dear David, I must make his further acquaintance. Did he send any more insulting messages to me?”</p>
			<p>“A score. He does not trust you or anyone else, Sir, and he told me so in good round terms. He bade me tell you you that Nassau does not stoop to intrigue behind the backs of his ministers. I think already he has quite a little Court.”</p>
			<p>Charles was deeply interested.</p>
			<p>“And you think him one to be reckoned with?”</p>
			<p>“More than that, Sir. I think him a great man; one to be propitiated at all costs. I foresee that he will rise suddenly, and at no very distant date.”</p>
			<p>“We must invite him to England,” said the King. “I am agog to see him.”</p>
			<p>“I doubt he would not come. He holds England and the English in contempt. Also King Louis. All this he told me. I spent a pleasant evening, Sir.”</p>
			<p>Charles rocked with laughter.</p>
			<p>“And I thought I could twist him round my finger! Zounds, why was I not there to see?”</p>
			<p>“It is no laughing matter, Sir. I am too old to be ordered about by petty princelings and their servants.”</p>
			<p>Charles sobered suddenly.</p>
			<p>“But, Roxhythe, it is a plaguey nuisance. This means I must turn to France.” He bit his finger-nail, frowning. Then he smiled again. “So you came away with a flea in your ear, my poor Roxhythe? God’s Body, how I have ill-used you! But tell me more of William. You say he has personality; he attracts. But does he inspire his followers with confidence?”</p>
			<p>“Judging from Dart’s airs, yes, Sir. He is very well served. It seems his servants would undergo any torture ever invented sooner than betray him.”</p>
			<p>Charles made a rueful grimace.</p>
			<p>“And,” continued Roxhythe, “he says himself that he will not have any man about him whom he could not trust implicitly.”</p>
			<p>“If I said that, I had only you left,” remarked Charles.</p>
			<p>“Precisely. And he seems to allow no familiarity⁠—no license. He lives in an atmosphere of gloom and depression.” Roxhythe looked round the luxurious room. “Thank God for Whitehall, and mine own Prince!” he said devoutly.</p>
			<p>Charles smiled.</p>
			<p>“He is more kingly than I am, eh?”</p>
			<p>“No,” said Roxhythe instantly. “He is too young to unbend. But in intrigue, Sir, you have met your match in William of Nassau.”</p>
			<p>“I must have a care,” laughed the King.</p>
			<p>“Indeed yes, Sir. Remember, the Orange is a man, and one who must not be forgotten. I foresee trouble. Guard against him.”</p>
			<p>“I will,” promised the King. “And now, David, we must look to France.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
