<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VI: The Price</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-2" id="chapter-2-6" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</h3>
				<p epub:type="title">The Price</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Before Roxhythe went again to Paris he craved and was granted an interview with the King. The Duke of York was present, and from his uneasy bearing and his black looks, Roxhythe guessed that he was assailed by one of the qualmish fits to which he had of late become subject. He sat by the fireplace, staring moodily into the flames. He barely acknowledged my lord’s bow.</p>
			<p>The King welcomed his favourite cheerily.</p>
			<p>“Well, my David? Ye have fresh news for me?”</p>
			<p>Roxhythe kissed his hand.</p>
			<p>“I have, Sir. I wished to acquaint you with it before I returned to France, so I begged this audience.”</p>
			<p>Charles nodded.</p>
			<p>“Do matters progress at last?”</p>
			<p>“Very fairly, Sir. Yet I think you must not hope for a conclusion this year.”</p>
			<p>“<i>Mort de ma vie!</i> How much longer am I to wait? It is December now and we have been negotiating for over a year!”</p>
			<p>“If you would give way to Louis’ demands you might conclude the affair at once.”</p>
			<p>“I’ll not give way! Surely you do not advise that?”</p>
			<p>“By no means, Sir. I counsel you to wait. I think that it will end in the spring if not before.”</p>
			<p>“I suppose I must be patient then. But have you discovered the price?”</p>
			<p>Roxhythe watched the Duke move angrily and scowl.</p>
			<p>“Madame is ever vague. Evidently Louis is wishful of seeing how much he need offer.”</p>
			<p>“Ay, he’s close-fisted. What says my sister?”</p>
			<p>“She’s hinted at sixty thousand pounds yearly, Sir.”</p>
			<p>“And you?”</p>
			<p>“I? Oh, I waved it aside, Sir! I told her that if the King of England was to be bought his price was high.”</p>
			<p>James flushed and stirred again. The King laughed.</p>
			<p>“Incomparable Roxhythe! What said she to that?”</p>
			<p>“Why she affected finality, Sir. Louis hopes that you will give way.”</p>
			<p>Charles played with one of his thick curls. He was frowning slightly.</p>
			<p>“Roxhythe, you walk round and round the point. How much can I with safety demand?”</p>
			<p>My lord studied his polished finger-nails. For a moment he did not speak; the King’s frown was reflected on his face.</p>
			<p>“In all, Sir, two hundred thousand,” he said at last. He spoke with deliberation.</p>
			<p>The Duke straightened in his chair.</p>
			<p>“It is ridiculous!” he rasped. “Two hundred thousand! You must be mad, my lord!”</p>
			<p>Roxhythe said nothing. Charles who had been fondling one of his dogs put it down. He was all attention.</p>
			<p>“You think that, Davy?”</p>
			<p>“I know it, Sir.”</p>
			<p>“How?”</p>
			<p>Roxhythe twisted one of his rings round.</p>
			<p>“Madame hath a great regard for you, Sir. She does not wholly play into King Louis’ hands. She remembers that if she is Louis his sister-in-law, she is also your sister.”</p>
			<p>“Oh. You said once, Roxhythe, that if it were possible she would play into my hands rather than Louis’.”</p>
			<p>“I said also, Sir, that she was a very wise intermediary. I still say so. It is impossible for her to take your part openly, but she can still help.”</p>
			<p>“She told you that Louis would go to that figure?”</p>
			<p>“N-no. Madame would not be so incautious. She is a very Queen of intriguers. Rather⁠—she gave me that impression.”</p>
			<p>“You are quick to take impressions, Lord Roxhythe!” sneered the Duke.</p>
			<p>Charles ignored him.</p>
			<p>“You are sure of this, David?”</p>
			<p>My lord shrugged.</p>
			<p>“I am never sure, Sir.”</p>
			<p>This seemed to satisfy the King. He sat with his chin in his hand, thinking.</p>
			<p>“Louis would never pay me such a sum without a struggle,” he mused. “If I stand too firm, I may lose all.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>“No,” said Roxhythe.</p>
			<p>“⁠—Yet, as you so wisely remarked, if I am to be bought, my price is high.”</p>
			<p>“My Lord Roxhythe speaks airily!” snapped James. “He cannot be certain of such facts. Louis will never go to that figure. Is it likely?”</p>
			<p>Roxhythe’s calm eyes surveyed him.</p>
			<p>“It is more than likely, sir.”</p>
			<p>“It means a struggle, eh?” asked Charles.</p>
			<p>“The thing is not worth having if you have not to fight for it, Sir.”</p>
			<p>“A King does not haggle!” retorted James.</p>
			<p>“I repeat, Sir, if you are to be bought it had best be for a fair price. If Louis wants an alliance with England, he must pay dearly for it.”</p>
			<p>“Roxhythe is right,” agreed the King. “I believe in sucking the French King of all he can give.”</p>
			<p>James brought his fist down on the table with some force.</p>
			<p>“The whole business is degrading and un-Kinglike! I mislike secret negotiations. We show ourselves afraid of the Government by trafficking with France behind its back. Why not do the thing openly and Royally?”</p>
			<p>“Why not leave the country at once?” shrugged Charles.</p>
			<p>“Sir, you are over-timorous! The army is behind you. You have naught to fear.”</p>
			<p>“No? Jamie, I had thought you wiser. Would you have more bloodshed in England? Would you put both our heads in danger?”</p>
			<p>“I would have straight dealings, and the Faith at all costs.”</p>
			<p>“You would not get it by foolhardiness. You would only ruin my popularity; jeopardize my crown.”</p>
			<p>“Anything were better than this hole-and-corner treaty!”</p>
			<p>Charles grimaced.</p>
			<p>“Even exile? No, no Jamie! This is an easier way.”</p>
			<p>“An underhand way! A timorous way!”</p>
			<p>“Let us be honest, my dear. We are afraid of the Government, alack! It is too powerful. Therefore it must be tricked and turned against itself. So shall I gain power.”</p>
			<p>“You’ll lose your popularity when the treaty is discovered,” returned the Duke.</p>
			<p>A little chuckle escaped the King.</p>
			<p>“Shall I, Davy?”</p>
			<p>“With some factions,” answered Roxhythe, gravely.</p>
			<p>“Only for the moment.”</p>
			<p>“That depends, Sir, on how far you play into Louis’ hands.”</p>
			<p>The Duke rose and went over to the window. For some moments he stood staring out into the gardens. Then he turned, and came back to the table.</p>
			<p>“Louis will require you to play very deeply into his hands, Sir,” he said.</p>
			<p>“He may require it, but I do not think I shall do it,” smiled Charles.</p>
			<p>“You will have to,” said James, tersely. “Oh, there are many points against this alliance!” He paced up and down the floor, his hands linked behind his back. Suddenly he stopped, and faced the King. “Sir, I implore you, have the matter put before the Cabinet! Enforce your will upon them, but make an honourable and a safe treaty! No one wants the alliance more than do I, but I do not want to play the part of catspaw to Louis, as we must if we make these secret terms. We show Louis that we stand in fear of Parliament. Oh, ’tis madness, Sir! I have thought well on it, and I know ’tis madness.”</p>
			<p>Charles laid his hand on his brother’s arm.</p>
			<p>“James, you are wrong. Can you not see that it is not I who will play the part of catspaw?”</p>
			<p>James stared.</p>
			<p>“Who then?”</p>
			<p>The most curious of smiles flitted across the King’s face.</p>
			<p>“Louis, my friend.”</p>
			<p>James shook off his hand.</p>
			<p>“The suspense has turned your brain! You must indeed be mad if you think that!”</p>
			<p>“I do not think, James. I know.”</p>
			<p>“Pah! If you sign this secret treaty they concoct, Louis holds you in the hollow of his hand! An you fail to fulfil your part, he will denounce you to the Government! And he’ll fail to pay you your wage!”</p>
			<p>“Expose me? Do you really think that?”</p>
			<p>“Assuredly!”</p>
			<p>“My good brother, he dare not. He would lose all hope of gaining England, if he did. The nation would be hot for war with France. I tell you, James, Louis is the one power I do not fear. Be reasonable! Leave this matter to me! You were not fashioned for the intriguer’s part.”</p>
			<p>“I thank God, no!” cried James. “I see you will go your own wilful way, but I pray you will not drown us all in a sea of disaster!”</p>
			<p>“You are so inconsistent,” sighed Charles. “A moment back ’twas you who were the fearnaught. Now you are as timorous as I never was. Do you so love the Government?”</p>
			<p>“No, by heaven!”</p>
			<p>“Then why hesitate to trick them as they would not hesitate to trick you? Has the Government treated us so well that we need consider it?” He snapped his fingers. “Bah! So much for the Government!”</p>
			<p>“ ’Tis not that I cavil at.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>“You fear that I shall in my turn be duped by Louis. I shall not. You fear a French yoke. You shall not be called upon to bear one.”</p>
			<p>“I fear you will sell England to France!” said James, impetuously.</p>
			<p>“I shall never do that, rest assured. Charles Stuart is no man’s chattel. If I accept Louis his offer ’tis for the furtherance of mine own ends. I enter into this bond with open eyes.”</p>
			<p>“If I could believe that⁠ ⁠… !”</p>
			<p>“You can believe it.”</p>
			<p>“And that is your last word? You’ll not lay the matter before the Cabinet?”</p>
			<p>For the first time Charles showed exasperation.</p>
			<p>“James, in the face of the Triple Bond, how can I?”</p>
			<p>James shook his head wearily.</p>
			<p>“I know not. Ye seem able to do most things.” He paused. “Well, there’s naught to be gained by argument. I’ll leave you.”</p>
			<p>“You stand by me in this matter, Jamie?”</p>
			<p>“I must.” James spoke over his shoulder. The next moment he was gone.</p>
			<p>“I was never so at one with His Grace,” remarked Roxhythe.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
