<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>IV: The Meeting</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-4" id="chapter-4-4" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h3>
				<p epub:type="title">The Meeting</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Lady Frances received the Darts very cordially. She succeeded in captivating Roderick, no easy task, and he afterwards told his brother that she was the most charming woman he had ever met.</p>
			<p>Fanny was anxious to know how Christopher liked his new master. She was much entertained by his description of Worth’s vagaries, and she thought that Christopher must be recovering from his awful depression. She realised, however, that his engagement with Worth would not last long. She had never thought that it would, but it served to distract his mind for the time.</p>
			<p>Montgomery appeared for a few minutes, especially to see Christopher. He, too, wanted to hear the boy’s opinion of Worth. They retired to a couch together.</p>
			<p>Lady Frances drew Roderick to the window-seat, a little apart.</p>
			<p>“So you have not seen Chris for seven years, Mr. Dart? It is a long time.”</p>
			<p>“Too long,” said Roderick. “I wish I could induce him to come back to Holland with me in the Prince his suite.”</p>
			<p>“Oh!” Lady Frances nibbled her finger-tip. “I don’t think so. We cannot spare him.”</p>
			<p>Roderick hesitated. Then he leaned forward.</p>
			<p>“Lady Frances, I know you have been very good to Chris. May I speak plainly?”</p>
			<p>“Please do!”</p>
			<p>“Then, I can see that the boy is unhappy.”</p>
			<p>“At present, yes. I think he will recover.”</p>
			<p>“Not here. Forgive me if I am impertinent, but Roxhythe is too close. He preys on Christopher’s mind. He should go away.”</p>
			<p>Lady Frances was silent for a moment.</p>
			<p>“Perhaps you are right. But I do not think that he will.”</p>
			<p>“I am afraid not. In spite of himself he is clinging to Roxhythe. Lady Frances, what has happened I do not know, but I can guess. It has been a terrible blow to Chris. He must have cared for Roxhythe quite absurdly.”</p>
			<p>“He still cares for him. Roxhythe has the power to endear everyone to him⁠—when he chooses. Believe me, up till a short time ago, he has been more than good to Christopher. It even surprised me who have known him from the cradle. In his way he is very fond of Chris. But only in his way.”</p>
			<p>“Madame, he evidently treated him very badly at the end. Chris would not have left him for a whim.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, I agree! Roxhythe can be a devil. I warned your brother years ago.”</p>
			<p>“And I. He was obstinate. And it has broken him.”</p>
			<p>“Nonsense! He is young. He will recover.”</p>
			<p>“It has broken his faith in mankind. No, do not shake your head, Lady Frances, I speak of what I know. Christopher, before he entered that man’s service, was the most innocent-minded youngster possible. He believed in the goodness of man. Now he does not. He is bitter.”</p>
			<p>“Oh no!” she protested. “Chris could not be.”</p>
			<p>“Very faintly, I admit. But the bitterness is there. He has had a rude awakening, and it has quite changed him. He will never again be the same joyous Chris.”</p>
			<p>“He is quieter, of course, and more repressed⁠—”</p>
			<p>“And less frank.”</p>
			<p>“Oh⁠—do you think so?”</p>
			<p>“I am sure of it. He fences when I question him; he has become almost impenetrable. Once I could read him like an open book.”</p>
			<p>“You don’t make enough allowance for his increasing years, Mr. Dart. Remember, when you last saw him he was growing up. Now he has grown. The boy is a man.”</p>
			<p>“It is not only that.” Roderick stared moodily across the room. “How I wish that he had never met Roxhythe!”</p>
			<p>“No. Roxhythe has matured him.”</p>
			<p>“Matured him wrongly. He has given him the courtier’s manner, the intriguer’s speech, the cynic’s heart.”</p>
			<p>“Fiddle!” said Lady Frances emphatically. “Fiddle!”</p>
			<p>Sir Jasper came towards them.</p>
			<p>“I am very churlish,” he smiled. “But I must go. These are busy times, Mr. Dart. Fanny, will you excuse me?”</p>
			<p>“How tiresome of you!” sighed my lady. “I suppose I must.” She watched him leave the room. “He is very hard-worked,” she said.</p>
			<p>Private conversation with Roderick was at an end, so Lady Frances induced him to recount some of his life abroad.</p>
			<p>Christopher found that his brother could be quite interesting when drawn out of his shell. In the middle of the recital the door was flung open.</p>
			<p>“The Most Noble the Marquis of Roxhythe!” announced the footman portentously.</p>
			<p>Roderick broke off. Lady Frances cast an agitated glance around.</p>
			<p>“I do not receive,” she said.</p>
			<p>The footman became flustered. It was evident that Roxhythe was close.</p>
			<p>Christopher had risen. He was rather white, but quite composed. A small pulse was throbbing in his throat.</p>
			<p>A leisurely footfall sounded. My lord had followed the lackey. He came into the room, typically languid.</p>
			<p>The footman cast his mistress an apologetic glance, and vanished.</p>
			<p>My lord bent over his cousin’s hand.</p>
			<p>“My fair Frances, I felicitate you.”</p>
			<p>“Why?” she asked, a trifle peevishly.</p>
			<p>Roxhythe waved his hand to the blue hangings of the room.</p>
			<p>“The admirable setting,” he answered. He bowed to Roderick. “Well met, Mr. Dart.” Then he looked at Christopher, and smiled, holding out his hand. “My dear Chris!”</p>
			<p>Christopher went to him quickly. He carried my lord’s hand to his lips and held it there for a moment.</p>
			<p>“What a charming reunion!” remarked Roxhythe blandly. “I am come at a lucky moment.”</p>
			<p>Lady Frances fanned herself slowly.</p>
			<p>“Pray sit down, David! You are so large.”</p>
			<p>Roxhythe chose a high-backed chair with arms. He turned to Christopher.</p>
			<p>“Tell me, Chris, how is your Worth?”</p>
			<p>Christopher smiled. His heart was leaping within him, but an apathetic calm seemed to have settled above it.</p>
			<p>“He is a sore trial, sir. He asks me the same question three times within the hour, and he is most unrestful.”</p>
			<p>My lord was pained.</p>
			<p>“Are you gibing at me, Chris?”</p>
			<p>“I wonder!” said Christopher, and laughed.</p>
			<p>Roxhythe turned to Roderick.</p>
			<p>“Christopher long since discovered that it was my foible that I could not have an unrestful companion. He has never ceased to poke fun at me on that score.”</p>
			<p>Roderick answered perfunctorily.</p>
			<p>Lady Frances stopped fanning herself and entered into the conversation.</p>
			<p>Presently Roderick looked across at his brother. He stood up.</p>
			<p>“Oh⁠—already?” asked her ladyship.</p>
			<p>“We have trespassed too long,” said Christopher. “Why, we have been here an hour!”</p>
			<p>“You were not wont to be so polite,” pouted Fanny. “But I’ll not press you to stay. Mr. Dart, I hope you will visit me again. You may bring Chris!”</p>
			<p>“You are very kind,” bowed Roderick. “I shall avail myself of that permission.”</p>
			<p>As Christopher bent over her hand Frances whispered hurriedly.</p>
			<p>“I am sorry, Chris! Indeed, I had no idea⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Why it’s nothing,” he answered. “Sooner or later it had to be.” He kissed her fingers again. Then he went to Roxhythe, who was talking inanely to Roderick. “My lord⁠—”</p>
			<p>Roxhythe turned.</p>
			<p>“Are you going, Chris? When do you intend to honour me?” The brown eyes were almost pleading.</p>
			<p>“Some day,” said Christopher. “Not⁠—quite⁠—yet.”</p>
			<p>My lord’s fingers held his firmly.</p>
			<p>“Don’t let it be too long, child. I miss you.”</p>
			<p>The young mouth set tightly. Christopher did not look at him.</p>
			<p>When they were gone, her ladyship looked straight into Roxhythe’s eyes.</p>
			<p>“Are you a devil?” she asked, deadly quiet.</p>
			<p>“I had not thought so, but what an amusing notion! Perhaps I am.”</p>
			<p>“You knew that Chris was to be here to-day!”</p>
			<p>“Did I?”</p>
			<p>“I’ll vow you did! Or you found out of my footman. Why did you come?”</p>
			<p>“I wanted to see him.”</p>
			<p>“Why? To keep the wound open?”</p>
			<p>“Perhaps.”</p>
			<p>“I suppose you wish now that you had not destroyed his faith in you. You want him back. I can tell you that he will never return to you.”</p>
			<p>“Can you? We shall see.”</p>
			<p>“I shall try to induce him to go away!”</p>
			<p>“Certainly. I shall not worry myself unduly. I only wanted to see him.”</p>
			<p>“Then it was hateful of you! You might have known that it would be worse for him after seeing you! You are vile!”</p>
			<p>“No. Only human.”</p>
			<p>“Inhuman!”</p>
			<p>Roxhythe laughed.</p>
			<p>Lady Frances sank back against the cushions. She gave a tiny sigh.</p>
			<p>“No. I suppose you are just Roxhythe.”</p>
			<p>“A new species, my dear.”</p>
			<p>“Sometimes so dear; mostly so cruel.”</p>
			<p>“Fanny, you are morbid! Confess, you have a great kindness for me?”</p>
			<p>“Alas, yes.”</p>
			<p>“This is most harrowing,” said my lord. “Why alas? We have always been very good friends.”</p>
			<p>“I know. I have nothing personal against you. But, oh, David! leave Christopher in peace! You have broken him; don’t try to make it worse.”</p>
			<p>“It was not my intention.”</p>
			<p>“It is what you are doing. You are trying to get him beneath your sway again! You will not do it, but it is cruel!”</p>
			<p>“Then if I shall not do it, why worry?” said my lord.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
