<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>II: The Schemers</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-5" id="chapter-5-2" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h3>
				<p epub:type="title">The Schemers</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Cautiously did my Lord Holles set about the business of snaring Roxhythe. It took some little time to win this trump card to his side, but he did it at length, marvelling at his own sagacity and cunning. At last Roxhythe allowed himself to be persuaded, and then he entered into the cause, as he put it, heart and soul. Shaftesbury still had misgivings; in Roxhythe’s presence his conversation was always guarded, yet he could not but see the truth in what Holles said: Roxhythe must at all costs work for the Duke of York’s exclusion. Reluctantly he invited Roxhythe to a discussion at his house.</p>
			<p>The only other schemers there that day were Holles and one Lord Roberts. Roberts was entirely of Holles’ mind concerning Roxhythe. He clasped my lord warmly by the hand.</p>
			<p>“I am glad to know that you are one of us, my lord!”</p>
			<p>“I am honoured to be one of you,” smiled Roxhythe. “This is a serious matter.”</p>
			<p>“It is indeed, my lord! It is indeed!”</p>
			<p>Shaftesbury drew forward a chair.</p>
			<p>“I need hardly say, Lord Roxhythe, that we trust to your discretion.”</p>
			<p>“Certainly,” bowed my lord.</p>
			<p>He listened to the discussion with interest. It appeared that the worthy gentlemen did not know how to win my Lords Halifax and Essex to their side. It also appeared that not many of the Council desired Monmouth for King.</p>
			<p>In the middle of the argument my lord upraised his smooth voice.</p>
			<p>“It seems, gentlemen, that the opposing side think his Grace would be an unpopular King.”</p>
			<p>“That is true!” cried Roberts. “They do not think that he would ever be received. I believe it is for that reason alone that they will not join us. Many of them do not really want William.”</p>
			<p>“Then they should be shown how popular is the Duke,” said my lord.</p>
			<p>“You mean that we should thrust him to the fore?”</p>
			<p>“Present him to the people.⁠ ⁠… H’m!” Shaftesbury was dubious.</p>
			<p>“He has been in the background of late,” remarked Holles. “It might be well to parade him.”</p>
			<p>“Where is his Grace?” blandly asked my lord.</p>
			<p>“He could not be present to-day,” answered Roberts, before Shaftesbury could intercept him.</p>
			<p>“A pity,” said Roxhythe. He shrugged, and brought out his comfit-box.</p>
			<p>“Why?” Shaftesbury it was who shot the question.</p>
			<p>“He might have had some suggestion to put forward,” replied my lord.</p>
			<p>“Oh, no!” Roberts shook his head. “He will be advised by us.”</p>
			<p>“Why, that is better still,” said my lord, very urbane.</p>
			<p>“Lord Roxhythe’s suggestion has merit,” observed Holles slowly. “It might be well to bring the Duke before the people’s eyes once more. You remember how popular he was during the war?”</p>
			<p>“The people admired his courage⁠—why not send him to Scotland?” Lord Roberts started forward. “If the King might be induced to put him at the head of the troops!”</p>
			<p>“To quell the rising? I do not know that His Majesty would do that.” Roxhythe spoke disparagingly. “He desires to keep the Duke at his side.”</p>
			<p>“Could you not prevail with the King?” asked Holles.</p>
			<p>Roxhythe seemed to consider.</p>
			<p>“It is difficult. I do not want to become a suspect.”</p>
			<p>“Surely you could do it in such a way that the King should suspect naught?”</p>
			<p>“I might. I do not know.”</p>
			<p>“It should not be so difficult. The King trusts in you.”</p>
			<p>“Yes. Well, I will think on it. If I may safely do so I will use my influence. But the suggestion should come from Shaftesbury.”</p>
			<p>“I agree with that,” said Roberts decidedly. “You could well suggest it to His Majesty, Ashley.”</p>
			<p>“I am not sure that I approve of the scheme. Better that we should wait for a time.”</p>
			<p>“No, no! If we wait we lose ground,” replied Holles. “If Monmouth quells the rising in Scotland the people will laud him once more. Then he can be paraded as much as you please. My Lords Halifax and Essex will see that he would be very easily the people’s choice.”</p>
			<p>Still Shaftesbury hesitated.</p>
			<p>“It is a bold step.”</p>
			<p>“A sure step.”</p>
			<p>“I think Holles is right,” said Roxhythe gently. “Halifax and Essex are uncertain. If they were clearly shown which way the people look they would be more likely to join us.”</p>
			<p>“That is so, of course. On the other hand they may take fright at so bold a move.”</p>
			<p>“If you think that I should keep Monmouth in the background,” said Roxhythe.</p>
			<p>“No. The step is worth taking,” said Roberts. “Do you, Roxhythe, think that Halifax and Essex will take fright?”</p>
			<p>“It is hard to say,” fenced his lordship. “I had not thought so, I confess, but I may have been wrong.”</p>
			<p>“There!” Roberts turned to Shaftesbury. “You hear?”</p>
			<p>“And I still hesitate.”</p>
			<p>Roxhythe smoothed his ruffles.</p>
			<p>“I do advise you to be guided by Shaftesbury. I know very little of these matters.”</p>
			<p>“You under-rate yourself, my lord!” cried Roberts. “I advocate the scheme.”</p>
			<p>“And I,” said Holles.</p>
			<p>Shaftesbury sighed.</p>
			<p>“Very well, gentlemen. Since you are determined.”</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>Roxhythe visited the King in his closet that evening. Charles laughed at him.</p>
			<p>“Well, my plotter?”</p>
			<p>“I am deep in intrigue,” said Roxhythe. He sat down. “I have attended a meeting of our dear friends Ashley, Holles and Roberts.”</p>
			<p>“I would give much to see you in their company,” chuckled the King. “What have you gleaned?”</p>
			<p>“Several things. One that will grieve you, Sir.”</p>
			<p>“Monmouth?”</p>
			<p>“Monmouth.”</p>
			<p>“He is privy to it?” Charles’ voice was anxious.</p>
			<p>“I am afraid so, Sir.”</p>
			<p>For a moment the King did not speak. He fingered his curls, his face overcast.</p>
			<p>“I had not thought it of him,” he said at last. “This is ill hearing, David.”</p>
			<p>“Not so ill as it might be, Sir. Monmouth would appear to be little more than a puppet in Shaftesbury’s hands.”</p>
			<p>Charles pulled down the corners of his mouth.</p>
			<p>“I wish he were not so weak!”</p>
			<p>“Well, Sire, you always knew that he was⁠—easily led.”</p>
			<p>“You said so from the first. What more?”</p>
			<p>“I played with these worthy gentlemen. It was most amusing. They debated as to how they were to further Monmouth’s cause. I suggested that he should be brought to the people’s notice again. They liked my suggestion. All but Shaftesbury. He has sense but not sufficient faith in himself. The next suggestion came from Roberts. Why not send Monmouth to quell the Scottish rising? Eventually they decided that this was a brilliant step. I am to prevail upon Your Majesty to consent. Shaftesbury is to suggest it to you.”</p>
			<p>“Shaftesbury is very daring!”</p>
			<p>“Very. Now, Sir, the point is this: by exhibiting Monmouth and by circulating the cry that he is the rightful heir, Shaftesbury will undoubtedly excite the people. I have insinuated that Halifax and Essex will also be won over.”</p>
			<p>“They will not.”</p>
			<p>“Most certainly they will not. They are hot for the Orange. And they would never stand for Monmouth on account of his birth. Your Majesty will pardon me if I speak too plainly.”</p>
			<p>Charles smiled.</p>
			<p>“Ay, I pardon you. Go on.”</p>
			<p>“When they see Monmouth blazoning in Scotland, and, later, blazoning through England, they will be the more alienated from Shaftesbury. And I rather think that the more timorous members of the Council, still wavering, will be shocked at Shaftesbury’s sudden move, and will either join the Orange party, or withdraw from the combat. Especially if Your Majesty shows signs of annoyance.”</p>
			<p>“Very wise, Roxhythe. But are you sure of Halifax and Essex?”</p>
			<p>“Perfectly. And I am moderately sure of our dear Sunderland.”</p>
			<p>“Sunderland! Is he an Orangist?”</p>
			<p>“Tentatively. If the Orange cause seems likely to prosper, he will become an ardent member. If not⁠—he will be properly indignant at the Exclusion Bill.”</p>
			<p>“He does not cast his eyes in Monmouth’s direction?”</p>
			<p>“He is too astute. Monmouth could never be King.”</p>
			<p>“H’m! Well, I always thought him a man of brain.”</p>
			<p>“He is very wily. I advise you, Sir, to consent to Monmouth’s generalship of the troops. Let him quell the rising; he has shown himself to be an able soldier. When the talk circulates that he is to be King after you, I shall be shaken with doubt. It may be that I shall affect others of Shaftesbury’s persuasion. It may even be that these eminently temperate gentlemen will draw back a little. Thus you have Shaftesbury standing alone. Then you may strike, and be sure of Essex and Halifax and Temple their approval.”</p>
			<p>Charles stopped fingering his curls. His eyes brightened.</p>
			<p>“<i>Cordieu</i>, David, I believe you are right! Essex and the rest of them are afraid of Shaftesbury since they supported the prorogation in May. If Shaftesbury wins they fall. Why, I shall have Shaftesbury in the hollow of my hand!”</p>
			<p>“It will mean a struggle,” warned Roxhythe. “He is a dangerous man.”</p>
			<p>“Whatever I do means a struggle. When I dismiss him Shaftesbury will move heaven and earth to defeat me, but it is the first step. And then⁠—an end to our brave Earl!”</p>
			<p>“So I think, Sir.”</p>
			<p>Charles relaxed again. Presently he frowned.</p>
			<p>“Heigh-ho! I am disappointed in Monmouth. I did not think he would work behind me.”</p>
			<p>“You would not like him to step into your shoes, Sir?” Roxhythe glanced at him curiously.</p>
			<p>Charles was genuinely surprised.</p>
			<p>“I know that I have accorded him many rights and favours, but surely you cannot think that I would set him above James? Why, he is illegitimate!”</p>
			<p>Roxhythe nodded.</p>
			<p>“I wondered.”</p>
			<p>“My moral sense is not so perverted, David!”</p>
			<p>“No. I am glad of it.”</p>
			<p>Charles opened his eyes lazily.</p>
			<p>“Do you care, then? I thought it was all one to you?”</p>
			<p>“It is really. But I would sooner have James than the son of Lucy Walters.”</p>
			<p>“Of course. God’s Body, but I should be a pretty Stuart if I connived at that!”</p>
			<p>Roxhythe took up his hat.</p>
			<p>“But you would not connive at it.⁠ ⁠… Well, Sir, I must be gone. I am due at Lord Essex his house in an hour.”</p>
			<p>“Poor David! Have you ever led so strenuous a life before?”</p>
			<p>“Seldom,” answered Roxhythe. He smiled a little.</p>
			<p>“I believe you like the game!” cried Charles, much amused.</p>
			<p>“It is not without interest,” admitted his lordship. Then he sighed. “They are all so easy to trick,” he deplored. He went out languidly.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
