<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VII: The Revenge</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-4" id="chapter-4-7" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</h3>
				<p epub:type="title">The Revenge</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>It was very cold. Outside a drizzling rain fell on the bleak gardens. The gaunt tree branches were wet and shining. Charles sat by the fire in his room, nursing a spaniel. His dark eyes were brooding, his fingers restless.</p>
			<p>“You heard what Danby had to say, David?”</p>
			<p>Roxhythe was gazing out into the rain.</p>
			<p>“Ay. Montague has been elected member for Northamptonshire.”</p>
			<p>“Danby tells me they quarrelled some time ago. God’s life, why must he quarrel with my French Ambassador of all people?”</p>
			<p>“Does Danby think he means harm?”</p>
			<p>“Ay. He spoke of incriminating documents. You know what that means, Roxhythe.”</p>
			<p>“Letters to Louis. I always said it was unwise.”</p>
			<p>The King was peevish.</p>
			<p>“If you had not fallen out of favour with Louis those letters need never have gone through Montague. Now we shall have Danby impeached.”</p>
			<p>“I think I see the hand of Shaftesbury. Montague is a tool.”</p>
			<p>“Shaftesbury or others. He hates Danby most.”</p>
			<p>“And Danby, being your tool, will turn on you.”</p>
			<p>“Another tax on my ingenuity! Danby intends to strike at Montague before Montague has time to strike at him.”</p>
			<p>“Better still to dispose of Montague.”</p>
			<p>“No, David! I have had enough blood.”</p>
			<p>Roxhythe shrugged.</p>
			<p>“How does Danby think to strike at Montague?”</p>
			<p>“Some talk of Montague’s conferring with the Papists without my knowledge. Danby plans to seize his papers.”</p>
			<p>“Why, that is very well! He is to act in your name?”</p>
			<p>“He says so. He is to inform the House of it to-morrow.”</p>
			<p>There was a long silence. Presently the King turned his head.</p>
			<p>“By the way, Davy, the Crewes are in town again.”</p>
			<p>“Crewes?”</p>
			<p>The King smiled faintly.</p>
			<p>“Forgotten already? The man you fell afoul of two years ago.”</p>
			<p>“That man! Yes, I remember. I told him to absent himself for a year.”</p>
			<p>“Well, he has been gone for two. He dared to appear at Whitehall.”</p>
			<p>“Oh? What did you say?”</p>
			<p>“Remembering your request I said nothing. But it was gross presumption on his part.”</p>
			<p>“What of the wife?”</p>
			<p>“She was there. I believe she has become most devoted.”</p>
			<p>“I thought she would.” Roxhythe came to the fireplace. “King Louis hath his revenge on me, Sir.”</p>
			<p>Charles raised his heavy brows.</p>
			<p>“Louis? Why?”</p>
			<p>“He conceived that I had promised to act in his interests. He was furious with me when you married the Lady Mary to the Prince.”</p>
			<p>“A pity. What is his revenge?”</p>
			<p>“I take it he has warned the Country Party against me.” Roxhythe smiled rather wearily. “No longer can I intrigue privately.”</p>
			<p>“It’s a plaguey nuisance. Faith, Louis is no gentleman to turn informer in that fashion!”</p>
			<p>“ ’Tis unkind of him, I admit. I am the less useful to you, Sir, in consequence.”</p>
			<p>Charles stretched out his hand quickly.</p>
			<p>“Don’t speak like that, Davy! Always you are my dearest friend!”</p>
			<p>Roxhythe went on his knee.</p>
			<p>“Always,” he said, and kissed the King’s hand. “Always.”</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>Danby’s attack on Montague failed, for Montague carefully secreted the two most important documents in his possession. One of them was the letter written by Charles’ order before the Peace of Nimeguen. Backed by the Treasurer’s bitterest enemies he brought charges against Danby. Impeachment followed. There was fresh uproar in the House.</p>
			<p>Danby narrowly escaped imprisonment, but the majority was small. Public feeling was against him.</p>
			<p>Then Charles prorogued his unruly Parliament, and in January, scarcely a month after, dissolved it.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
