<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XI: The Great Roxhythe</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-5" id="chapter-5-11" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</h3>
				<p epub:type="title">The Great Roxhythe</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>“My lady, there is a lackey from Bevan House who desires speech with you.”</p>
			<p>Lady Frances was surprised.</p>
			<p>“So? I’ll come.” She went downstairs. When she saw John she smiled. “Well John? You’ve a mess⁠—” She stopped short, staring at him. “John! What is it?”</p>
			<p>The man’s face worked.</p>
			<p>“My lady⁠—my master⁠—” he choked.</p>
			<p>Lady Frances drew nearer.</p>
			<p>“Quickly, John! What⁠—what is it?”</p>
			<p>“He is⁠—dying!” John’s voice trembled. “He⁠—desires to see you.”</p>
			<p>All the colour ebbed slowly from her face.</p>
			<p>“Good⁠—God! No, no!”</p>
			<p>“He was⁠—shot⁠—last night.” John’s head was bowed. “I cannot tell you, madam. He wishes you to come.”</p>
			<p>“Shot! Oh, heaven, ’twas that we heard, then! Yes, yes, I’ll come at once! Only wait one moment!” She turned, and flew upstairs.</p>
			<p>In three minutes she was back again, seated in the coach. She had commanded John to sit with her. Her eyes were wide.</p>
			<p>“It was last night? When he left the ball?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, my lady. They⁠—brought him home⁠—unconscious.”</p>
			<p>“Dolts! Fools! Why did they not take him back to the house?”</p>
			<p>John brushed his hand across his eyes.</p>
			<p>“It⁠—was not⁠—my lord’s will, madam,” he said simply.</p>
			<p>Lady Frances burst into tears.</p>
			<p>“Can’t they⁠—save him? Surely, surely, it is not mortal?”</p>
			<p>“<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Burnest was with him through the night, madam. Nothing⁠—can be done.”</p>
			<p>Lady Frances wept.</p>
			<p>Outside the door of my lord’s room she met the surgeon. Eagerly she caught at his arm.</p>
			<p>“Tell me he will live! Oh, he cannot die! He cannot!”</p>
			<p>Burnest took her hand.</p>
			<p>“I beg you will be calm, Lady Frances. The bullet entered a vital part. Don’t grieve my lord!”</p>
			<p>She wiped her eyes.</p>
			<p>“I will be calm. Is he⁠—is he conscious?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, madam, but very weak. He commanded that you should be sent for. You’ll not excite him?”</p>
			<p>She drew herself up.</p>
			<p>“Of course I shall not.”</p>
			<p>Burnest opened the door for her.</p>
			<p>My lord lay in bed, raised slightly on pillows. He was wrapped in an elegant bed-gown, and he wore his wig. His eyes were closed, but he opened them as Frances entered.</p>
			<p>He smiled.</p>
			<p>“My dear Fanny⁠—all my difficulties are solved.”</p>
			<p>She bent over him.</p>
			<p>“Dear, wicked Roxhythe!” In spite of herself, tears stole down her cheeks.</p>
			<p>Up went his brows.</p>
			<p>“I thought you knew that I could not bear a weeping woman?” His voice was full of mockery.</p>
			<p>“Since you cannot weep for yourself, David.⁠ ⁠…” she whispered, and flicked away the teardrops.</p>
			<p>“Weep? I?” The faint voice was disdainful. “I am only too well satisfied.”</p>
			<p>John put a chair for her ladyship. Frances sat down.</p>
			<p>Roxhythe allowed her to take his hand. He was staring before him.</p>
			<p>“The⁠ ⁠… welcome end. Gad, but I was glad to see the fellow⁠ ⁠… lurking in the shadows!⁠ ⁠… He little knew⁠ ⁠… little knew.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>“Who was it, David?” Lady Frances was surprised at her own calm.</p>
			<p>“Trenchard. He thought⁠ ⁠… I should betray him.⁠ ⁠… Sapient man.” Suddenly Roxhythe chuckled. “I told him⁠ ⁠… to shoot. He was⁠ ⁠… so surprised⁠ ⁠… he⁠—” He broke off, coughing.</p>
			<p>Burnest was at his side in a moment. The handkerchief that came away from my lord’s lips was stained red.</p>
			<p>“Sir, I beg you will keep quiet.”</p>
			<p>“No doubt. You want⁠ ⁠… to prolong⁠ ⁠… life. Unfortunately⁠ ⁠… I want⁠ ⁠… to end it.”</p>
			<p>“Sir⁠—”</p>
			<p>“My⁠ ⁠… dear Burnest⁠ ⁠… we have dealt with⁠ ⁠… one another⁠ ⁠… before. Don’t⁠ ⁠… you realize⁠ ⁠… the futility of⁠ ⁠… argument?”</p>
			<p>“You were always very stubborn, sir.” Burnest put a spoon to his lips, smiling.</p>
			<p>Roxhythe took the restorative. His eyes closed.</p>
			<p>For a long time there was absolute silence. My lord lay in a kind of stupor. Presently a deep furrow appeared between his brows. He began to speak, muttering.</p>
			<p>“… vain⁠ ⁠… regrets!⁠ ⁠… Not I, sir. There was⁠ ⁠… never a question⁠ ⁠… of it. If you⁠ ⁠… think that⁠ ⁠… Fanny⁠ ⁠… you do not⁠ ⁠… know me. Always I am Roxhythe. Roxhythe⁠ ⁠… <abbr epub:type="z3998:personal-name">C. R.</abbr>⁠ ⁠… linked together.⁠ ⁠… Sire, all my⁠ ⁠… life.⁠ ⁠…” His voice died away. He moved uneasily; his hand was very hot.</p>
			<p>“My dear⁠ ⁠… Saint-Aignan!⁠ ⁠… a maker of⁠ ⁠… gloves. Blue⁠ ⁠… entwined. Did⁠ ⁠… Colbert tell you, Madame?” His eyes opened. They were shining with a strange, feverish light. “When⁠ ⁠… you⁠ ⁠… are gone⁠ ⁠… nothing matters. The⁠ ⁠… better⁠ ⁠… part. Fools!⁠ ⁠… fools!⁠ ⁠… Someone said⁠ ⁠… that. The better⁠ ⁠… part!⁠ ⁠… Always your⁠ ⁠… faithful⁠ ⁠… servant, Sir.” He struggled up on his elbow. “It is⁠ ⁠… Cromwell’s lucky day! How⁠ ⁠… could we⁠ ⁠… hope to win? Courage, Sir! This is⁠ ⁠… not the end!”</p>
			<p>Burnest put him back on his pillows.</p>
			<p>“Hush, sir! Be still.”</p>
			<p>He was shaken off.</p>
			<p>“Gentlemen⁠ ⁠… the King⁠ ⁠… is dead!⁠ ⁠… Who was it⁠ ⁠… uttered the accursed⁠ ⁠… words? His hand⁠ ⁠… is cold⁠ ⁠… Sire⁠ ⁠… Sire!”</p>
			<p>“Give me that bottle!”</p>
			<p>John put it into his hands, weeping. Burnest measured out a spoonful. The mixture trickled between my lord’s parted lips. Frances watched in silent agony.</p>
			<p>The brown eyes opened.</p>
			<p>“Fanny⁠ ⁠… why weep? Do you⁠ ⁠… think I⁠ ⁠… mind?”</p>
			<p>“My lord, I beg you will not talk!”</p>
			<p>“You⁠ ⁠… intrude⁠ ⁠… Burnest.” The eyes were haughty.</p>
			<p>“I am sorry, sir. I am responsible for you, you see.”</p>
			<p>The fine lips curled.</p>
			<p>“No one is responsible⁠ ⁠… for Roxhythe⁠ ⁠… save himself. You would⁠ ⁠… oblige me⁠ ⁠… by retiring.”</p>
			<p>Lady Frances laid her hand on the surgeon’s.</p>
			<p>“<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Burnest, let him have his way. You cannot help now.”</p>
			<p>“Madam, I cannot allow him to⁠—”</p>
			<p>“<i xml:lang="fr">Mordieu!</i> Am⁠ ⁠… I to be set⁠ ⁠… at naught?”</p>
			<p>“You only excite him. Please, please stand back!”</p>
			<p>Burnest shrugged and walked away.</p>
			<p>“Another⁠ ⁠… of those⁠ ⁠… who dislike me. I have⁠ ⁠… inspired⁠ ⁠… great love, or great⁠ ⁠… hatred⁠ ⁠… never a⁠ ⁠… lukewarm⁠ ⁠… liking, I thank God!”</p>
			<p>Frances stroked his hand.</p>
			<p>“In truth, you are Roxhythe,” she smiled.</p>
			<p>“Always. They⁠ ⁠… would have liked⁠ ⁠… to see me⁠ ⁠… fall. Had I lived⁠ ⁠… I would have shown them that Roxhythe⁠ ⁠… can stand⁠ ⁠… alone! But it is⁠ ⁠… better so. I am⁠ ⁠… going⁠ ⁠… to my master.” Again his eyes closed. After perhaps ten minutes they opened. They did not see Lady Frances.</p>
			<p>“It is⁠ ⁠… no laughing matter, Sir!⁠ ⁠… I am⁠ ⁠… too old to be⁠ ⁠… ordered⁠ ⁠… by petty princelings⁠ ⁠… Thank God⁠ ⁠… for Whitehall⁠ ⁠… and my⁠ ⁠… own master. Curse⁠ ⁠… the dolt! Why⁠ ⁠… must he sit⁠ ⁠… in your place?⁠ ⁠… So you will leave⁠ ⁠… me, Chris? After all these⁠ ⁠… years. Did you bring my mask?⁠ ⁠… You know me⁠ ⁠… very well⁠ ⁠… don’t you? You will⁠ ⁠… not stay with me? You make too much⁠ ⁠… out of⁠ ⁠… too little. I regret⁠ ⁠… nothing.⁠ ⁠… The better⁠ ⁠… part⁠ ⁠… the better⁠ ⁠… part.⁠ ⁠… <i xml:lang="fr">Cor⁠ ⁠… dieu!</i> I would choose the same⁠ ⁠… the same.⁠ ⁠…” The brown eyes were frowning. “Why⁠ ⁠… must you sit⁠ ⁠… in his place? Memories⁠ ⁠… only⁠ ⁠… memories.⁠ ⁠… What if I did⁠ ⁠… lose all? The⁠ ⁠… one friend⁠ ⁠… the one friend.⁠ ⁠… Nothing matters⁠ ⁠… save your pleasure, Sir. I am⁠ ⁠… busied with⁠ ⁠… your affairs.” Suddenly he laughed. “They⁠ ⁠… remind me of⁠ ⁠… cabbages!⁠ ⁠… a fruitful topic!” He drew his hand away, passing it across his eyes. “You remember⁠ ⁠… the green hangings⁠ ⁠… don’t you, Chris?” His hand fell away. He looked at Lady Frances’ bowed head. “I⁠ ⁠… have been⁠ ⁠… dreaming. I thought Chris was⁠ ⁠… here. Fanny?”</p>
			<p>“Dear David?” Lady Frances tried to choke the sobs that rose to her lips.</p>
			<p>Roxhythe was smiling now.</p>
			<p>“You⁠ ⁠… remember how Chris⁠ ⁠… laughed? It always⁠ ⁠… pleased me. He laughed⁠ ⁠… because I objected⁠ ⁠… to the green⁠ ⁠… hangings. They are gone⁠ ⁠… now. I had them⁠ ⁠… changed. It is⁠ ⁠… eight years. A⁠ ⁠… long time, my⁠ ⁠… dear.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, David. You still have⁠—me.”</p>
			<p>“Of course. You⁠ ⁠… could never⁠ ⁠… quite⁠ ⁠… disown me⁠ ⁠… could you?”</p>
			<p>“I am always⁠—your friend, David. We understand one another.”</p>
			<p>The smile grew.</p>
			<p>“But then you⁠ ⁠… are not⁠ ⁠… impenetrable, you know!”</p>
			<p>“Am I not? How⁠—you love to⁠—tease me, David!”</p>
			<p>“<i xml:lang="fr">Vraiment</i>⁠ ⁠… I am a trial. Don’t let Jasper meddle⁠ ⁠… in Monmouth’s cause!”</p>
			<p>“I will not.”</p>
			<p>“I⁠ ⁠… ought to send⁠ ⁠… some farewell⁠ ⁠… messages. I always⁠ ⁠… disliked⁠ ⁠… the heroic pose⁠ ⁠… off the stage. Do you⁠ ⁠… remember Crewe?”</p>
			<p>“And the silly wife! That was unlucky, David.”</p>
			<p>“A⁠ ⁠… mistake⁠ ⁠… I admit. Give⁠ ⁠… my love⁠ ⁠… to Chris. I would I⁠ ⁠… had seen him⁠ ⁠… just once⁠ ⁠… again. You⁠ ⁠… won’t believe me⁠ ⁠… but I cared⁠ ⁠… for him.”</p>
			<p>“I know that you did, dear. I always knew it. If I said hard things I am very sorry!”</p>
			<p>“My dear⁠ ⁠… according⁠ ⁠… to your lights⁠ ⁠… you spoke⁠ ⁠… rightly. You⁠ ⁠… could not⁠ ⁠… understand.”</p>
			<p>She shook her head.</p>
			<p>“We won’t speak of it, David.”</p>
			<p>“We might⁠ ⁠… quarrel⁠ ⁠… an we did. I regret⁠ ⁠… I cannot⁠ ⁠… repent, weeping. It⁠ ⁠… is not in⁠ ⁠… the part.” He paused, and his hand tightened on hers. “I could have⁠ ⁠… regained⁠ ⁠… all my lost⁠ ⁠… power. It was⁠ ⁠… within my grasp. But it⁠ ⁠… was not⁠ ⁠… worth it. You⁠ ⁠… understand?”</p>
			<p>“Perfectly, David.”</p>
			<p>“Your chief⁠ ⁠… attraction. What⁠ ⁠… is the⁠ ⁠… time?”</p>
			<p>She glanced at the clock.</p>
			<p>“Just after three, dear.”</p>
			<p>“Ah!⁠ ⁠… <em>He</em> died⁠ ⁠… at noon. I shall not wait⁠ ⁠… much longer. I am⁠ ⁠… very content.” The weary lids drooped. “I have to⁠ ⁠… thank you⁠ ⁠… for your⁠ ⁠… kindness. I knew⁠ ⁠… that you would⁠ ⁠… come.”</p>
			<p>“I would have come from the ends of the earth, David.”</p>
			<p>“Happily⁠ ⁠… you were⁠ ⁠… nearer. I should have been⁠ ⁠… loth to put you⁠ ⁠… to such⁠ ⁠… inconvenience. It is⁠ ⁠… very dark. Draw the curtains⁠ ⁠… further apart! No⁠ ⁠… matter.⁠ ⁠…” The whisper ceased.</p>
			<p>Burnest tiptoed to the bed.</p>
			<p>“It is nearly the end,” he murmured in Lady Fanny’s ear. “Just sit where you are.”</p>
			<p>She nodded. Her face was drawn.</p>
			<p>John crept up to the bed and knelt beside it, his head buried in the coverlet. Lady Frances laid her hand on his shoulder.</p>
			<p>“Do not grieve, John,” she said pitifully. “You know he would not wish it.”</p>
			<p>Only a strangled sob answered her. Roxhythe moved his hand.</p>
			<p>“Devil⁠ ⁠… take you⁠ ⁠… John! What now?”</p>
			<p>John carried the hand to his lips, smothering it with kisses.</p>
			<p>“My lord! My dear lord!”</p>
			<p>“Chut!” Roxhythe pressed his fingers feebly. “Have⁠ ⁠… a care to him⁠ ⁠… Fanny.”</p>
			<p>“I promise.”</p>
			<p>There was a long, long silence. Nothing broke it save the laboured breathing. John was quiet now, clasping my lord’s hand. Lady Fanny sat very still.</p>
			<p>Over by the fire was the surgeon, staring into the red embers. He did not move.</p>
			<p>Half an hour crept by; yet another. Somewhere outside a clock chimed mournfully.</p>
			<p>My lord’s eyes opened. There was a faraway look in them not of this world.</p>
			<p>“I must⁠ ⁠… to Whitehall. To⁠ ⁠… my little⁠ ⁠… master.” Faintly, very faintly came the whisper. His beautiful smile curved my lord’s lips. “Sire⁠ ⁠… Sire.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>The eyelids fluttered, closed. My lord’s hand quivered. He gave a deep sigh, full of peace.</p>
			<p>“Only⁠ ⁠… your⁠ ⁠… pleasure⁠ ⁠… Sir.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>His head fell sideways a little on the pillow. The smile was still on his lips, but the light had gone out.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
