<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>III: Her Ladyship</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-2" id="chapter-2-3" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h3>
				<p epub:type="title">Her Ladyship</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Thus began the negotiations between the Kings of France and England. They were necessarily slow, and they entailed many journeys for the favourite to and from Paris. Christopher noticed that the French visits were becoming more and more frequent and decided that the lady must be unusually attractive. He did not worry his head over it at all.</p>
			<p>Towards the end of the year came a lull in the proceedings. A deadlock had been reached, and it almost seemed as though the alliance would not take place. Lord Arlington hesitated and demurred, irritating King Louis; and Madame, the fair intermediary, would give Roxhythe no definite answer as to the price that Louis would pay. Both parties were dissatisfied with one another, both demanded what the other would not give. For a time Roxhythe ceased his visits to Paris and found amusement with a certain Lady Crewe, a bride, newly come to town. She was young, beautiful and rather unsophisticated. She was very much in love with her husband, but she was flattered by Roxhythe’s attentions.</p>
			<p>In October the deadlock had to some extent been passed. The journeys to Paris became more frequent again. During one of them a little stir was created in fashionable London by the arrival of the Lady Frances Montgomery, daughter of the late Duke of Rochefort, and wife of Sir Jasper Montgomery, of the Diplomatic. She had returned from Spain, where she had been for the last three years. She was cousin to my Lord Roxhythe, and before she had married Montgomery there had been much talk of an alliance between her and my lord. Her father had wished it, but evidently she and Roxhythe had not, for London had been denied the thrill of seeing my lord caught at last. The Duke had not looked favourably on Montgomery. His daughter might have married the bluest blood in France or England had she liked. She had been bred in the French Court; she had beauty, wit and that mysterious something known as charm. She had had many suitors, but not one had she accepted. She preferred to remain single, and, as the Duke could refuse her nothing, single she did remain. When she came to the Restoration Court she made a huge success. Charles himself paid her extravagant compliments; the men fell at her feet. Rumour said that she was as astute as Madame, Duchesse d’Orléans, and had more than once had a finger in various intrigues. Then she met Sir Jasper and electrified Society by deciding to marry him. As usual she had her way. There was a magnificent wedding, and she went away with honest but dull Montgomery and was seen no more.</p>
			<p>Now she had returned because her husband had been ordered home. As soon as the news became general every scrap of gossip concerning her was retailed. A great many people wondered whether she had wearied of Montgomery and whether she would amuse herself with her cousin.</p>
			<p>It was said of her that she was the one woman with whom Roxhythe had not trifled. They had never been anything dearer than very good friends.</p>
			<p>When she had been in London for about a week she gave a reception to which all London flocked. She had not asked Roxhythe to come because she believed him to be in Paris, so she was considerably surprised when, midway through the evening, two gentleman were announced, one of whom was the Most Noble the Marquis of Roxhythe, and the other <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dart.</p>
			<p>Roxhythe was magnificent in purple and gold. Diamonds scintillated from his breast where his several orders hung, and from his long, thin fingers. He made his entry superbly and swept a glance round the room.</p>
			<p>Lady Frances was standing with the young Duchess of Monmouth. He saw her at once, recognising her slim, graceful figure. She was talking animatedly, with many tiny gestures of the hand learnt at the French Court, and many lightning smiles that showed pearly teeth behind her red lips.</p>
			<p>Christopher watched her, conscious of her fascination. He could not take his eyes off her face. It was not so much her beauty which attracted him, but her great vivacity. Her brown eyes flashed as she talked; dimples quivered on her cheeks. Around her was gathered quite a little court, hanging on her lips, waiting for a look or a smile.</p>
			<p>Roxhythe glanced at his secretary amusedly.</p>
			<p>“She is quite charming, is she not?” he asked.</p>
			<p>Christopher drew in his breath.</p>
			<p>“Is⁠—that Lady Frances?” he said.</p>
			<p>“That is Lady Frances. A sad minx.” He laughed softly at Christopher’s indignant face.</p>
			<p>Frances had seen them. She came across the room, hands outstretched.</p>
			<p>“My very dear David! What an honour!”</p>
			<p>Roxhythe kissed her hand.</p>
			<p>“You did not invite me,” he said. “But I came.”</p>
			<p>“Of course I am delighted! I thought you away, else I should assuredly have asked you to come.”</p>
			<p>“So I thought,” nodded his lordship, pensively. “May I present <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dart? Chris, Lady Frances Montgomery.”</p>
			<p>My lady flashed her bright eyes at Christopher. She seemed to search his face for the fraction of a second. Then she smiled. Her smile was wonderful. Christopher fell in love with her on the spot.</p>
			<p>“I must introduce you to someone very nice,” she decided. “Come with me! David, I want to talk to you, so you must not run to Lady Crewe’s side yet.” She bore Christopher off to the other end of the room. When she came back she found Roxhythe talking to Lord Buckhurst and one or two others.</p>
			<p>“No,” she said, emphatically. “You may none of you come with us. I’ve not seen Roxhythe for three years, and I’ve much to tell him. Charles, if you love me as much as you swear you do, you’ll entertain Miss Douglas for me.”</p>
			<p>Buckhurst grimaced.</p>
			<p>“That’s a poor substitute for you, Fanny!”</p>
			<p>“Dear Charles, Arabella disapproves of you very thoroughly! ’Twill amuse you.”</p>
			<p>Buckhurst looked gloomy.</p>
			<p>“It may. Thy will be done, Fanny!” He walked off.</p>
			<p>Lady Frances and Roxhythe withdrew to a small room, adjoining the ballroom. Once there, Roxhythe took his cousin in his arms, and kissed her. Lady Frances made no demur. On the contrary, she returned the kiss, and settled herself on a blue and gold couch.</p>
			<p>“David, do you know that it is very refreshing to see you again?” Her humorous eyes challenged him.</p>
			<p>Roxhythe sat down beside her.</p>
			<p>“It must be.” He looked at her quizzically. “The compliment withheld.”</p>
			<p>“You always were provoking,” she retorted. “But are you not glad to see me?”</p>
			<p>“Superlatively. You never expect me to make love to you.”</p>
			<p>“Of course I am flattered,” she said.</p>
			<p>His lordship was regarding her appraisingly.</p>
			<p>“I was afraid the climate might spoil you,” he pronounced at length. “Thank heaven, you are as beautiful as ever!”</p>
			<p>She tilted her head on one side.</p>
			<p>“I thought I was more beautiful than ever!” she said.</p>
			<p>“My dear, Jasper is not the judge of beauty that I am. If he told you that, he lied. It were impossible for you to be more beautiful. Riper, perhaps.”</p>
			<p>“I do not like the word,” she answered, gravely. “Next I shall be overripe.”</p>
			<p>“And after that, decay,” nodded my lord.</p>
			<p>“How ungallant of you!” cried Lady Frances, letting fall her fan. Then she laughed. “In truth, we are getting old, Roxhythe.”</p>
			<p>“We are,” he agreed. “Foiled again, Fanny. Is it London for you now?”</p>
			<p>“I think so. Unless Jasper is sent abroad again, which is unlikely. Who is the charming boy?”</p>
			<p>“I don’t know,” replied Roxhythe. “Have you found one?”</p>
			<p>“David, you must really not try to impress me with your affectations! I mean the boy you brought here tonight.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, Christopher! Yes, he is rather likeable, isn’t he?”</p>
			<p>“Who is he?” insisted Frances.</p>
			<p>“He is my secretary. One of the Darts of Suffolk.”</p>
			<p>“Your secretary? How came he to be that?”</p>
			<p>“I really don’t remember. I seem to have had him some time.”</p>
			<p>“He was not with you when I left England.”</p>
			<p>“No. I think it must have been shortly after you left. My last was a fool. And so untrustworthy.”</p>
			<p>“Aha? You wanted a discreet man for some intrigue, I suppose?”</p>
			<p>Roxhythe looked at her in hurt wonderment.</p>
			<p>“My dear Fanny, have you ever known me require assistance in an affaire?”</p>
			<p>“I meant a political intrigue.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, lud!” said Roxhythe, and was shaken with laughter. “Yes, Fan, that is it. At my time of life I am turned plotter. It is very sad.”</p>
			<p>She looked at him steadily for a moment.</p>
			<p>“I wish you would not think me a fool, Roxhythe. How is your beloved King?”</p>
			<p>“The same as ever. He will be pleased to see you.”</p>
			<p>“I think he will. I am going to Whitehall with Jasper on Thursday. You will be there?”</p>
			<p>“Since you are going, yes. The compliment granted.”</p>
			<p>“You know, I am very glad I did not marry you,” she told him.</p>
			<p>“So am I,” said my lord. “We should have quarrelled. ’Tis ever the way when both have wit. I suppose you never quarrel with Jasper?”</p>
			<p>“Insufferable man! I shall go.” She rose, and held out her hand. “Come, David! You must make yourself very agreeable to everyone.”</p>
			<p>“Why, I rather thought of leaving!” he protested. “I only came to see you.”</p>
			<p>“Then you will offend me very grievously. Come!”</p>
			<p>He suffered himself to be drawn to his feet.</p>
			<p>“If you give way to idle passions you will have lost your chief attraction,” he sighed. “If I succeed in offending you I shall lose all interest.”</p>
			<p>“What a terrible fate were mine, then!” she mocked. “Oh, here is Jasper come to seek me! Jasper, Roxhythe is worse than ever!”</p>
			<p>Montgomery grasped my lord’s hand.</p>
			<p>“I am overwhelmed to see you,” he smiled. “But I cannot have my wife monopolized.”</p>
			<p>“You have it wrong,” retaliated Frances. “I monopolized him! He is the gr-reat Roxhythe! Oh fie!” she blew him a kiss and rustled away.</p>
			<p>“She is remarkably fascinating,” reflected my lord. “But no doubt I should have wearied of her.”</p>
			<p>On the way home Christopher informed Roxhythe that Lady Frances had asked him to wait on her. He also informed Roxhythe that she was the sweetest, loveliest lady he had ever met.</p>
			<p>My lord settled himself more comfortably in his corner of the coach.</p>
			<p>“Minx,” he murmured. “So she has you in her toils? I had almost come to think you immune.”</p>
			<p>“I greatly admire and respect her ladyship,” said Christopher with dignity.</p>
			<p>My lord closed his eyes.</p>
			<p>“Yes, that is always the way. Odso, I can scarce remember my calf-love! No doubt she was years older than I.”</p>
			<p>“You are most provoking tonight,” said Christopher huffily.</p>
			<p>“So she said,” agreed his lordship.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
