<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VII: The Hand of Fate</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-3" id="chapter-3-7" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</h3>
				<p epub:type="title">The Hand of Fate</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>The wound was slow in healing, and Roxhythe grew impatient. Then, unexpectedly, came the King. As before, he was ushered into the sick room, but this time he barely waited for Roxhythe to speak before he broke out.</p>
			<p>“David, the devil is in it this time, and no mistake!”</p>
			<p>Roxhythe supported himself on his elbow, wincing at the pain the movement gave him.</p>
			<p>“What’s amiss, Sir?”</p>
			<p>“Dimcock is down with the fever!” Charles could still laugh, albeit a trifle ruefully.</p>
			<p>“The hand of fate,” said Roxhythe.</p>
			<p>“It would appear so. Yet am I determined that this letter shall go.”</p>
			<p>“Who will you send to take it?”</p>
			<p>“Plague seize it, I do not know! I trust no one. So I came to you.”</p>
			<p>“Give me three days, Sir! I’ll do it.”</p>
			<p>“No, that was not my meaning. You will stay where you are. I thought mayhap you know of a trustworthy man?”</p>
			<p>“Not I, Sir, alack! Oh, devil take Crewe and his works! That I should fail you when you most need me!”</p>
			<p>Charles forced him back on to his pillows.</p>
			<p>“Gently, Roxhythe! Is there no one whom you can call upon?”</p>
			<p>“No one.”</p>
			<p>Charles threw himself into a chair.</p>
			<p>“The luck is against me. I had thought of Louise, but we are at variance for the moment on account of poor Nelly. Oddsfish, but Louise can be very spiteful when she likes! I’ll not approach her.”</p>
			<p>“Sire, take it as an omen! The Fates are against it. Negotiate through Barillon.”</p>
			<p>Charles was superstitious by nature, but the appeal failed.</p>
			<p>“Damme, no! I am determined. Think, David! Is there no one?”</p>
			<p>“Justin?”</p>
			<p>“I believe him to be in Shaftesbury’s pay.”</p>
			<p>“Cherrywood?”</p>
			<p>“I would send him but that he is in Flanders with Monmouth.”</p>
			<p>“Then there is no one. Buckingham would have done it, but you have cast him off.”</p>
			<p>“I’d not trust him. Think again, David!”</p>
			<p>There was a long silence. Roxhythe lay staring before him, his brain working swiftly. Charles, watching him anxiously, saw his lips tighten suddenly, and his brows draw together. He seemed to be considering.</p>
			<p>“Roxhythe, do not fail me in this!” besought the King.</p>
			<p>Roxhythe looked at him wistfully. He sighed.</p>
			<p>“I will not fail you, Sir. I know of a man.”</p>
			<p>“Ah! His name?”</p>
			<p>“Dart.”</p>
			<p>“Your secretary? I’d not thought of that. But will he do it?”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” said Roxhythe. “He will do it for my sake.”</p>
			<p>“And he may be trusted?”</p>
			<p>“Implicitly.”</p>
			<p>“Why, David, it could not be better!”</p>
			<p>“There is a drawback.”</p>
			<p>“Always the pessimist!”</p>
			<p>“Perhaps. Christopher will serve you very well provided that he does not know what it is that he does.”</p>
			<p>“Oho!” Charles pursed his lips. “Sits the wind in that quarter?”</p>
			<p>“Christopher believes you to be impeccable. He has no notion of French intrigue. He trusts me wholly.”</p>
			<p>“He would not trust either of us did we send him to Paris,” said Charles gloomily.</p>
			<p>“We shall not send him to Paris.”</p>
			<p>“Roxhythe, let me have no riddles! What is it that you propose?”</p>
			<p>“Send him with your letter to Flanders, with another writ by you to Cherrywood. You can rely on him?”</p>
			<p>“Ay.”</p>
			<p>“He will deliver the packet to Cherrywood, who will journey with it to Paris. Chris need do no more. It’s very simple.”</p>
			<p>“It is well thought out,” admitted Charles. “But what will you tell Dart? There must be no shadow of suspicion.”</p>
			<p>“I will say that the packet contains private orders for Monmouth. You need have no fear.”</p>
			<p>“If they are orders for Monmouth he will wonder why he is to take them to Cherrywood,” objected Charles.</p>
			<p>“No. I shall tell him that they are to be delivered into his hands and not the Duke’s on account of the French spies that do watch Monmouth very closely.”</p>
			<p>“ ’Tis very intricate, David. Are you sure that you can vouch for Dart?”</p>
			<p>“I am sure.”</p>
			<p>“I would Dimcock were not ill,” sighed the King. “I mislike this scheme.”</p>
			<p>“Can you think of another, Sir?”</p>
			<p>“No. It must suffice. You’ll pave the way with Dart?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, Sir. When do you want him to start?”</p>
			<p>“The letter is not yet writ. Can you spare Dart by Wednesday?”</p>
			<p>“Sooner.”</p>
			<p>“Wednesday is soon enough. I’ll bring both letters then.”</p>
			<p>For a long time after the King had departed, Roxhythe lay still.</p>
			<p>When he had engaged Christopher eight years ago, it had been because he thought that the boy might prove useful in just such an affair as this. Gradually he had come to see that Christopher’s standards of right and honour were rigid and uncompromising. More than once he had sounded him on the subject, and always he had struck against that Puritanical streak that was at the bottom of his nature. He realised then that Christopher would never serve him as he had intended. Because the boy had become dear to him he had kept him at his side, taking great pains to trick him into oblivion of the intrigues that went on in his house. Looking back, he realised how much Christopher meant to him. He had grown accustomed to his quiet adoration, had come to expect the little attentions that the boy bestowed on him.</p>
			<p>In some vague way Christopher’s presence was necessary to his happiness.</p>
			<p>Until today he had relinquished all ideas of using him in his machinations. But today Charles had called on him for help. It was something in the nature of a struggle. If he chose to respect Christopher’s scruples he must fail the King; if he came to the King’s rescue he would perhaps destroy Christopher’s love for him. Secrets often leaked out. For the present he could keep the boy in ignorance of the real purpose of his mission, but one day it was possible that Christopher might discover the truth.</p>
			<p>The King’s cause had won. Roxhythe’s fondness for Christopher was as nothing beside his love for Charles. Long, long ago he had made his choice; had thrown in his lot with the King; all else had faded before the one man. It was not likely that the tables would be reversed at this stage.</p>
			<p>Charles had called on him: it was enough.</p>
			<p>When Christopher presently entered the room Roxhythe pointed to a chair.</p>
			<p>“Sit down Chris.”</p>
			<p>Christopher obeyed, somewhat mystified.</p>
			<p>“His Majesty visited me again today while you were out,” began Roxhythe.</p>
			<p>“So soon? He was here a very short while since.”</p>
			<p>“This time he came for a purpose. I can trust to your discretion, Chris?”</p>
			<p>“Of course, sir.” Christopher was interested.</p>
			<p>“Yes. You probably know that the King has always to beware of French spies; spies who would not scruple to interfere with his correspondence.”</p>
			<p>“I do suppose so, sir.”</p>
			<p>“For this reason he hath about his person several men whom he can trust implicitly. They are his private messengers. When he desires to send dispatches privately these men bear them. But lately two have been discovered to be untrustworthy, another is ill, and the fourth is with Monmouth.”</p>
			<p>Christopher assented vaguely. He did not perceive the drift of the conversation.</p>
			<p>“And I,” said Roxhythe, “am also ill.”</p>
			<p>“Are you a messenger, sir?”</p>
			<p>“No, but I have played the part ere now. The King dare trust so few men.”</p>
			<p>“I see. Somehow I did not think you⁠—Go on, sir!”</p>
			<p>“It so happens that the King wishes to send very private orders to Monmouth, concerning various matters, warning him ’gainst certain men that the King knows to be in French pay. My Lord Danby has couriers, but he cannot vouch for them. You understand that ’twould be ruinous if these dispatches fell into the hands of the French, or into those of some of our number whom we believe to be also in French pay.”</p>
			<p>Christopher began to see daylight.</p>
			<p>“Yes, sir. Do you mean⁠—”</p>
			<p>“I mean that the King has appealed to me to find him a messenger who is above suspicion, who will guard that packet with his life. There are very few men today whom we can trust, but I think that there is one.”</p>
			<p>“Sir⁠—will you⁠—speak plainly?” Christopher clasped his hands on his knee.</p>
			<p>“I told His Majesty that I could find him a courier. I had you in mind.”</p>
			<p>“Oh⁠—sir!”</p>
			<p>“You will do it?”</p>
			<p>“Oh⁠—yes! I⁠—I am all amazed! I⁠—can scarcely believe that this honour is to be given⁠—to me!”</p>
			<p>“It is a very great honour,” said Roxhythe gravely. “I assured His Majesty that you were worthy of it.”</p>
			<p>Christopher caught his hand to his lips.</p>
			<p>“How kind you are! I owe it all to you! I⁠—I cannot thank you enough! I do swear that I will prove faithful.”</p>
			<p>“I know that. You accept the task then?”</p>
			<p>“Accept! I would do aught in the world for His Majesty⁠—and you.”</p>
			<p>“So I thought. You served me very well eight years ago. You are older now, and wiser. I can trust to your discretion.”</p>
			<p>“I do not know why you should, sir! Indeed, I have done naught for you save the most trivial matters! I am overwhelmed.”</p>
			<p>“You’ve no alarms?”</p>
			<p>“Sir! When have I shown myself a coward?”</p>
			<p>“You will be alone this time.”</p>
			<p>“I do not fear.”</p>
			<p>“You will need all your wits. Remember, you go in my stead.”</p>
			<p>“I do remember it, sir. ’Tis because of that that I can scarce believe mine ears! That His Majesty should deign to send me in your place!”</p>
			<p>“His Majesty acts on my advice. If you fail⁠—if you deliver those letters wrongly⁠—on me will fall the blame.”</p>
			<p>“I will not! Oh, I swear that I will never give them up save to the Duke himself!”</p>
			<p>“You will not give them to the Duke. He also is surrounded by spies. It needs a more seasoned head to give them to him without creating suspicion. The King his fourth agent is in Monmouth’s train, as I told you. You will give the packet to him, and he will do the rest.”</p>
			<p>“Very well, sir. Who is this man?”</p>
			<p>“You have never seen him. He is named Cherrywood⁠—Frederick Cherrywood. You will find him easily enough, for he is in Monmouth’s household.”</p>
			<p>“Will he believe me to be the King’s messenger?” asked Christopher.</p>
			<p>“The King will give you his ring as token. And he will recognize the cipher. This evening I’ll outline your route and give you all minor instructions. You start in two days.”</p>
			<p>“Two days!” Christopher gasped. “But you, sir!”</p>
			<p>“What of me?”</p>
			<p>“You are ill! How can I leave you?”</p>
			<p>“Strange as it may seem, I have been ill before, and there was no Christopher. The King his will must be obeyed even though I were dying, which I am not.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, sir, of course! But I wish you were not ill. I do not like to leave you.”</p>
			<p>“If I were well you would not be asked to bear these dispatches,” Roxhythe reminded him. “However, you need have no qualms concerning me. I am under oath to His Majesty to obey the surgeon.”</p>
			<p>“If that is so it is very well,” said Christopher.</p>
			<p>“Yes. His Majesty will give the dispatches into your hands on Wednesday. And remember this, Chris! There must be no talking to Harcourt, or to Lady Fanny.”</p>
			<p>“Of course not, sir.” Christopher spoke with dignity.</p>
			<p>On Wednesday Burnest was so satisfied with my lord’s condition that he allowed him, on pressure, to be dressed and carried down to the library. There he reposed on a wide couch, rather exhausted, but cheerful. Christopher arranged his cushions more comfortably.</p>
			<p>“It has tired you, sir. You had best have kept your room.”</p>
			<p>“My dear boy, I dislike my room. The hangings are so crude. I shall have it seen to.”</p>
			<p>“You were never used to object to them,” said Christopher, smiling.</p>
			<p>“I was never in the room for so long at a stretch before. I believe that green has retarded my recovery.” He ate a comfit. “You are very smart today, Chris.”</p>
			<p>Christopher blushed, conscious of his modish brown velvet with its gold embroidery.</p>
			<p>“I see you know how to please His Majesty,” said my lord. “And, I think, here is His Majesty.”</p>
			<p>Footsteps were coming across the hall; voices were heard, and then the heavy curtain was swung back, and King Charles passed into the room.</p>
			<p>The footmen straightened their beautifully curved backs and disappeared.</p>
			<p>Christopher stood stiff. Out of the corner of his eye he saw that Roxhythe was trying to rise. He cast an anxious glance in his direction and another at the King. Charles was studying him calmly. He saw the hurried glance at Roxhythe, and turned.</p>
			<p>“David, I have never met a man so self-willed! Be still!” He clasped Roxhythe’s hand affectionately. “You are better? The surgeon permitted you to come downstairs?”</p>
			<p>“Should I have dared to disobey Your Majesty’s commands?” smiled my lord.</p>
			<p>“I do not know!” Charles laughed. “I dare swear you bullied Burnest into complying with your will.” He looked at Christopher. “Eh, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dart?”</p>
			<p>Christopher bowed.</p>
			<p>“There was some slight coercion, Sir,” he replied. “But Burnest consented very quickly.”</p>
			<p>“I knew it!” said Charles. “Roxhythe, I am of a mind to send you back to bed!”</p>
			<p>“I beg you will not, Sir. The colour of the hangings has preyed cruelly upon my nerves.”</p>
			<p>Charles was amused.</p>
			<p>“The hangings?”</p>
			<p>“Green, Sir. They remind me of cabbage which I detest.”</p>
			<p>“The contemplation of cabbages!” chuckled the King. “Is it a fruitful topic?”</p>
			<p>“Very, Sir. But wearisome. Will you not sit down?”</p>
			<p>Charles sank into a chair. Again he addressed Christopher.</p>
			<p>“It is his foible that no one must stand in his presence. It unnerves him.”</p>
			<p>Christopher was rearranging my lord’s pillows which had fallen in his struggle to rise. He laughed.</p>
			<p>“I did discover that within a week, Sire.” He stood back, surveying his handiwork. “Is it to your liking, sir?”</p>
			<p>“Thank you, yes. Since you are acquainted with my foible, sit down!”</p>
			<p>Charles nodded.</p>
			<p>“Yes, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dart. And so to my errand. Roxhythe has informed you of my will?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, Sir.”</p>
			<p>“Well?”</p>
			<p>The King was grave now. Christopher had been conscious of his charm; he now felt the force of his personality. It was overwhelming.</p>
			<p>“I can scarce thank Your Majesty enough for the great honour you do me. If I may I will serve Your Majesty faithfully.”</p>
			<p>The far-famed Stuart smile touched the King’s lips.</p>
			<p>“Very well spoken, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dart. You have considered everything?”</p>
			<p>“Sire, I found nothing to consider save that Your Majesty had commands for me.”</p>
			<p>“A courtier, forsooth! We must see you at Whitehall. Then you will undertake this charge, and swear to carry it through with all care and discretion?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, Sir.”</p>
			<p>“You understand that you must exercise the greatest care? You must never allow the packet to leave your person; you must never allow any man however harmless to suspect you of being my envoy; you must deliver the packet into Cherrywood his hands. Whatever happens, none other must see it or know of its existence. You understand?”</p>
			<p>“I understand, Sir.”</p>
			<p>“That is well. When you have given it to Cherrywood you will return at once to London with his reply.”</p>
			<p>“Your Majesty may trust me.”</p>
			<p>“I do trust you, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dart. It will be in your power to betray me, yet I believe that no temptation would be strong enough to induce you to do so.”</p>
			<p>“I swear Your Majesty shall not be disappointed in me! I would serve Your Majesty till death itself!”</p>
			<p>“I thank you. And I compliment you.” The King drew two sealed packets from his bosom. “This one”⁠—he held up the smaller of the two⁠—“is for Cherrywood’s perusal; the other you will give him to take to Monmouth.”</p>
			<p>Christopher was on one knee now. Roxhythe flicked a speck of dust from his sleeve.</p>
			<p>Charles laid his hand on the young man’s shoulder. His voice was almost stern. His fingers gripped.</p>
			<p>“I give them into your hands. See to it that they do not leave them until you have found Cherrywood. It is my most strict command.”</p>
			<p>Christopher took the letters. He spoke huskily.</p>
			<p>“Your Majesty has my word.”</p>
			<p>“Now swear to me by all that you hold most sacred that you will never by word or sign divulge the secret of this mission.”</p>
			<p>“I swear it.”</p>
			<p>The hand left his shoulder. Charles smiled again.</p>
			<p>“I can offer you no reward, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dart. But we shall be very pleased to see you at Whitehall.”</p>
			<p>“Your Majesty⁠—is very good,” stammered Christopher.</p>
			<p>Charles drew off his signet ring.</p>
			<p>“You must show this to Cherrywood,” he said.</p>
			<p>Christopher took it and carried it to his lips.</p>
			<p>“On my head be it, Sir!”</p>
			<p>The King’s eyes twinkled.</p>
			<p>“Put it in a safer place, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dart,” he advised.</p>
			<p>And so the interview ended.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
